Paper Review: **Distributed 3D image segmentation using micro-labor workforce**

    DP2: Distributed 3D image segmentation using micro-labor workforce Richard
    J.  Giuly, Keun-Young Kim and Mark H. Ellisman. `Bioinformatics
    <http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/29/10/1359.abstract>`__
    `doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt154
    <http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt154>`__

I just love this paper. It is just at that intersection of quirky and serious
which makes you laugh while being dead serious (I admit that it only *makes you
laugh* if you have a very particular sense of humour).

The quirky aspect is the following: they authors solve complex
three-dimensional image segmentation problems by using a Amazon Mechanical
Turk crowd of untrained workers to do it!

They do so by reducing the problem to a serious of simple yes/no questions that
can be understood by people without any background in neurology.

The serious aspect is that it seems that **it actually works**. It gives good
segmentations without resorting to highly-paid experts or very fancy
algorithms.

ยง

One of the main results that has come out of `bioimage informatics <>`__ that
surprises `computer vision <>`__ people and biologists is the following:

**Computers can be better than people at bioimage informatics**

We (humans) are excellent at face recognition (a task we evolved to do and grew
up doing), which is why computer vision researchers who work on this sort of
problem tend to revere the human visual systems. However, we just cannot
recognize the endoplasmic reticulum. Even trained cell biologists are really
not that good at recognising the ER in fluorescent microscopy image.

We can perhaps read this paper in the context in the context of the general
discussion of human/computer partnerships. What `can humans do for the computer
<>`__ and vice-versa?

ยง

I have now gone off on a tangent, but the paper does present a fairly typical
image processing pipeline:

1.  Add Gaussian blur to images
2.  Over-segment into super pixels
3.  Merge superpixels into segmentations by performing repeated queries of the
    form:

Q: *Should region A and region B be merged together?*

This is all very standard except that ``Q`` **is performed by humans**. In
fact, what I think is the main contribution of this paper: *Q is performed by
non-experts*. And it works. By dumbing it down for the human, the computer
actually ends up doing well.

It's briliant!

ยง

The thing I do wonder is why this was an Application paper instead of a
Research paper. It presents what I think is an interesting new perspective,
which seems more valuable than the software (which, by the way, is not even
open-source; which limits its worth as well). This also meant that the authors
only had two pages in which to expose their methods.

I would have loved to read more results and discussion. I half-suspect that
this was not the authors' choice and can only hope that the increasing
digitalization of research publications removes these page limitations.

