Is Biology a Science?

When reading `this polemic
<http://aeon.co/magazine/nature-and-cosmos/why-its-time-to-lay-the-selfish-gene-to-rest/>`__,
I could not help but think of the genre of articles that compares economics to
physical sciences to argue that *economics is not a science*.

It's exactly the same of sort of argument: trying to make a disagreement in
emphasis into a disagreement in substance (I mean, this isn't even like the
major fights in that other non-science, theoretical physics, where string
theory is either the solution or a blind-alley).

At the end of the article, I still don't understand the *anti-selfish gene*
argument. I see two arguments in this article:

Differences in gene expression can account for large changes. Well, duh. My
hand is not liver even though the cells there have the same genome.

The whole genome is a system and genes do not function individually. This is
the part of the argument that most feels like the *anti-efficient markets*
polemics I read after `Eugene Fama won the Nobel Prize
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugene_Fama>`__. It's a `complete straw-man
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straw_man>`__. Even in the *Selfish Gene* book,
Dawkins [#]_ stresses that (1) fitness of a gene is a function of the
environment and (2) the most important environment for a gene is the genome in
which it is inserted. Genes can be high-fitness by changing the expression of
other genes, perhaps conditional on certain environmental cues. How else does
gene expression change? It's genes all the way down [#]_.

§

Let me put it this way: the gene that codes for the light receptors in your
eyes would be pretty useless in a species that lives in dark caves. The gene
that regulates the expression of other genes would be pretty useless in the
absence of those other genes. Even the light receptor gene is pretty useless if
you species does not have a nervous system. Was this ever in doubt?

Also, yes, we are no longer trying to look for the gene for autism, the gene
for homosexuality, or the gene for X. In as much as these are genetically
mediated, these are multi-gene phenomena with complicated environmental
interactions. But saying this just says that the gain in fitness of a specific
gene is a complicated process, which depends on the whole context, and that is
not easy for humans to apprehend it.  It does not invalidate the idea of a gene
as the basic element that gets selected (in the context of other genes). Only
in a fuzzy sense does the systems biology view contradict the selfish gene
model. In a non-fuzzy sense, they're compatible.

§

Maybe there is something I'm missing in the anti-selfish gene argument, but
having read a few of these, it always feels that the author just does not like
the word selfish in the metaphor as it celebrates the wrong kind of human
behaviour (as if making a point about the evolution of insects had anything to
do with how you should live your life: a locust is a grasshopper therefore you
should visit your mother for Thanksgiving).
    
The author says towards the end:

    It’s not a selfish gene or a solitary genome. It’s a social genome.

And the camera pans to an open field with a painted barn. The the American flag
is visible on the horizon. Soft music.

§

Turns out that, just like Economics, Biology is not a science.

.. [#] I find myself in the unusual position of defending Dawkins, which I
   generally find a very shallow thinker.

.. [#] Dawkins says this in the piece. The author is taken by surprise (which
   just means that he never even understood the view that he's criticizing) and
   replies with a non-answer quote. It's like that old chestnut *markets are
   not efficient because you cannot predict them* (actually, the efficient
   market hypothesis is the idea that you cannot predict markets, so you've
   just argued that gravity is not true because things fall).

