Mahotas Software Meta Paper Published

I got a new paper published:

    Mahotas: open source software for scriptable computer vision
    by Luis Pedro Coelho in Journal of Open Research Software
    [`DOI <http://dx.doi.org/10.5334/jors.ac>`__]

This is about my computer vision software package, `mahotas
<http://github.com/luispedro/mahotas>`__. It started as a way to do `bioimage
informatics <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioimage_informatics>`__, but the
sotware is actually generic to computer vision.

Earlier, I posted a `tutorial on image segmentation
<https://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/05/20/segmenting-images-in-parallel-with-python-jug/>`__
which used mahotas.

The journal calls these *metapapers* in that they are not the work but a
reference to the work, i.e., the software. This is an interesting new
iniciative to reward scientific software development. As I argued before,
`release of scientific software is a collective action problem
<https://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/05/06/people-are-right-not-to-share-scientific-code/>`__:
It is better for science to have software released, but not for the individual
researcher. I also wrote that it would be a good idea to change the incentives
to make it more profitable to do the right thing. The Journal of Open Research
Software is exactly one such step.

It has already been used in a few publications, both by myself and others:

- `Determining the subcellular location of new proteins from microscope images using local features by Coelho et al. (2013) <http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt392>`__ (See `posts on this paper <http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/tag/coelho2013_bioinformatics/>`__
- `Enabling user-guided segmentation and tracking of surface-labeled cells in time-lapse image sets of living tissues by Mashburn et al. (2012) <http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cyto.a.22034>`__
- `Decentralized Multi-Agent Algorithm for Translational 2D Image Alignment by Machálek and Olševičová (2013) <http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-642-32335-5_2>`__
- `Hierarchical Structuring in Block Copolymer Nanocomposites through Two Phase-Separation Processes Operating on Different Time Scales by Ploshnik et al. (2013) <http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201300091>`__

As you can see, this is not all about Bioimage Informatics, which is sort of
nice as it means that this is actually useful outside of the field in which it
was initially developed.

