1. `Very nice analysis of mean returns over many years
<http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.in/2013/07/the-value-of-public-sector-pensions.html>`__
(you expect to not hit your expected value).

(Feel free to ignore the political points)

2. More on the `commercial reuse of open access papers <http://proteinsandwavefunctions.blogspot.dk/2013/07/commercial-reuse-of-published.html>`__

I have always thought that the biggest problem with the *non-commercial*
clauses is that it is so hard to define what it means. When I released the
materials for `Programming for Scientists
<https://github.com/luispedro/Programming-for-Scientists>`__, I added `a clause
saying <http://luispedro.org/pfs/copyright.html>`__ that *use in a class at an
accredited degree granting institution is also permissible*. It was not clear
to me that teaching a course at a university is a non-commercial activity. If
you think that a university *obviously is not* a commercial enterprise, I
invite you to argue your case, not in the comments of the blog, but after
enrolling and receiving a tuition bill. So, if your paper is CC-BY-NC, can I
distribute it to students in my class?

Obviously, I don't mean *can I go ahead and ignore your license without
realistic fear of getting sued by you*. I can probably do the same with any
closed-access paper. [#]_

3. Why do we let doctors `prescribe off-label but not test it
<http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2013/07/off-label-prescribing-vs-rct.html>`__?

Actually, the doctor is fine doing the randomized study, just not publishing
it. Often we have this rule R in context X and it seems horrible to imagine a
world where *not R in X*, but then in context Y (which is very similar to *X*),
*not R* is just fine. The practice of medicine is heavily regulated and people
are very resistant to the idea that it is too much and it should be easier to
practice medicine in the US. However, it is fine to be `a complete quack
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homeopathy>`__ and tell people that they can cure
cancer with holy water.

In a completely different context, I remember one `econtalk
<http://www.econtalk.org/>`__ where the guest and Russ both agreed that it
would be horrible if there were two levels of airplane safety: a safe and
expensive plane and a less-safe one for those not paying as much. What horrible
society would allow for poorer folks to travel in unsafe planes while the rich
have their strict safety inspections?  And in my head I'm going *a society that
allows busses, no?* If your *X* is not *plane* but *a trip between two cities*,
then we already have a cheap and unsafe alternative to a nice and safe one. But
as long as we keep these as separate things, then we reason about them
individually and `status quo bias
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Status_quo_bias>`__ kicks in.

4. The `problem of article level metrics
<http://scholarlyoa.com/2013/08/01/article-level-metrics/>`__: they will be
gamed.

.. [#] I recall a dialogue between two people which went something like this:
   "This is much better than the commercial things." "It's not commercial?" "No,
   it's from a small producer." "Who doesn't sell it for money?" "No, they do
   sell it, but it's not a big company, you know?" "But I can go there and buy
   it, right?" "Yes." "If they sell it, it's commercial; they just have a
   particular marketing concept that appeals to their target demographic." This
   was on the topic of cheese, but applies here as well.

