title: Paper: Probabilistic Inference of Biochemical Reactions in Microbial Communities from Metagenomic Sequences
--

**Paper**: *Probabilistic Inference of Biochemical Reactions in Microbial
Communities from Metagenomic Sequences* by Dazhi Jiao, Yuzhen Ye, and Haixu
Tang

This is a recent paper in Plos CompBio which looks at the following problem:

1. Metagenomics gives us many genes, which map to enzymes.
2. Those enzyme can be mapped (by KEGG) to reactions, but these assignments are ambiguous.
3. Can we obtain a consensus interaction network?

The authors approach the problem probabilisticly by computing, for each
possible interaction network, a probability. Their model is based on the notion
that real interaction networks probably have fewer metabolites than all
possible combinations. From the paper (my emphasis):

    However, if the product of a gene is annotated to catalyze multiple
    reactions, some of these reactions may be excluded from the sampled
    subnetwork, as long as at least one of these reactions is included. We note
    that, according to this condition, each sampled subnetwork represents a
    putative reconstruction of the collective metabolic network of the
    metagenome, among which **we assume the subnetworks containing fewer
    metabolites are more likely to represent the actual metabolism of the
    microbial community than the ones containing more metabolites.**

From this idea, using standard `MCMC <>`__ they are able to assign to each
reaction a probability that it is part of a community.

They validate their method using clustering. They show that using their
probability assignments results in better separation of samples that relying on
naïve assignments of all enzymes to all possible reactions (See Figure 2 in the
paper). The result is nice and clean.

They also suggest that they are able to extract differentially present
reactions better than the baseline methods. Unfortunately, due to the lack of a
validated result, it is really impossible to know whether they just got more
false positives. I do not really know how to do it better, though.

However, it is good to be able to even talk of differentially expressed
reactions instead of just genes or orthologous groups.

*

In global, the authors present an interesting formulation of a hard problem. I
always like the idea of handling uncertainty probabilistically. 

This is the sort of paper that opens up a bunch of interesting ideas and makes
you wish that the next steps had been taken:

- Can they handle uncertainty in the basic gene assignments?
- Or KEGG annotations?

Currently, they assume that all enzymes are actually present and perform one of
the functions listed, but neither of these statements is always true.

Another area where their method could be taken is whether to move up from
computing marginal probabilities of single reactions and into computing small
subnetworks. I hope that the authors will explore some of these questions and
present us with some follow up work in the near future.

