Paper Review: Unsupervised Clustering of Subcellular Protein Expression
Patterns in High-Throughput Microscopy Images Reveals Protein Complexes and
Functional Relationships between Proteins

This is an excellent paper that came out in PlOS CB last week. The authors
present a high-throughput analysis of yeast fluorescent microscopy images of
tagged proteins.

Figure 8, panel B (doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003085.g008) shows a few examples
of what they mean


.. image:: http://www.ploscompbiol.org/article/fetchObject.action?uri=info:doi/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003085.g008&representation=PNG_M
    :alt: Figure 8

One interesting aspect is that they work in a dynamic aspects only from
snapshots. I was previously involved in a similar project (ref. 18 in the
paper [#]_) and so I was happy to see others working in similar fashion.

By leveraging the bud size as a marker of cell stage, they can build dynamic
protein profiles and cluster these. This avoids the need for either (i)
chemical synchronization [which has other side-effects in the cell] or (ii)
movie acquisition [which besides taking longer, itself damages the cells
through `photoxicity <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phototoxicity>`__].

In all of the examples above, you can see a change in protein distribution as
the bud grows.

§

They perform an unsupervised analysis of their data, noting that

    Unsupervised analysis also has the advantage that it is unbiased by prior
    ‘expert’ knowledge, such as the arbitrary discretization of protein
    expression patterns into easily recognizable classes.

Part of my research goals is to move beyond supervised/unsupervised into mixed
models (take the supervision, but take it with a grain of salt). However, now
we are talking about their paper, which was purely unsupervised.

§

The authors are Bayesian about their estimates in a very interesting way.

They evaluate their segmentations against training data, which gives them a
confidence measure:

    Our confidence measure allows us to distinguish correctly identified cells
    from artifacts and misidentified objects, without specifying what the
    nature of artifacts might be.

This is because their measure is a density estimate derived from training based
on features of the shape. Now, comes the nice Bayesian point:
    
    This allows us to **weight probabilistically** data points according to the
    posterior probability. For classes of cells where our model does not fit as
    well, such as very early non-ellipsoidal buds, we expect to downweight all
    the data points, but we can still include information from these data
    points in our analysis. This is in contrast to the situation where we used
    a hard threshold to exclude artifacts.

    (emphasis mine)


§

Unlike the authors, I do not tend to care so much about *interpretable*
features in my work. However, it is interesting that such a small number
(seven) of features got such good results.

There is more in the paper which I did not mention here: the image processing
pipeline (which is fairly standard if you're familar with the field, but this
unglamorous aspect of the business is where you always spend a lot of time); 

§

One of my goals is to raise the profile of `Bioimage Informatics
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioimage_informatics>`__, so I will try to have
more papers in this field on the blog.


.. [#] We worked on mammalian cells, not budding yeast. Their cell cycles are
   very different and the methods that work in one do not necessarily work in
   the other.

