**Mapping the Strategies of Viruses Hijacking Human Host Cells: An Experimental
and Computational Comparative Study** by *Jacques Colinge*

Original Paper: `Viral immune modulators perturb the human molecular network by
common and unique strategies. Pichlmair et al. (2012)
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature11289.html>`__

Interesting use of tagged proteins with purification and mass spec to analyse
the interactions between viral and host proteins. Many viruses target the same
proteins, but there is specificity too.

Drilling down on HCV, USP19 is a major target of viral proteins. This protein
promotes degradation of misfolded proteins, but it may also be able to detect
non-host proteins in general.

Human proteins that are targeted by virusses are much more likely to be hubs of
protein/protein interaction networks. As virus are often very small so can only
target a small number of proteins, thus targetting the hubs may be efficient
(at the cost of specificity of effect).

**Multi-task learning for Host-Pathogen protein interactions** by *Meghana
Kshirsagar*

Many pathogens will use the same strategies, thus we can learn across different
pathogens to find similarities between different host/pathogen pairs. Their
working hypothesis is that pathogens will target the same pathways in the host.

This is formalised as a multi-task learning process: loss on the training set
is regularized by the difference of pairwise pathway signatures. Technically,
this is nice because it can incorporate unlabeled data or missing data (as long
as you can compute signatures).

