People do read you thesis

Last week, `@proflikesubstance <https://twitter.com/ProfLikeSubst>`__ wrote
that you should `Publish papers. Your thesis means nothing
<http://scientopia.org/blogs/proflikesubstance/2013/08/27/3545/>`__:

    Get the papers out. Don't focus on an arcane document that will gather dust
    for the next 50 years until the departmental office needs space and throws
    the old ones out.

§

I didn't even get the bound copies of my thesis. It's a PDF sitting `on a
department server <http://reports-archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/lane.html>`__ (it's
open access!).

Thus, thiss image of a thesis as a big block of paper, gathering dust is out of
date. During my graduate studies, I did read a few theses by others.

Because things are now electronic, *people will read your thesis*. Probably not
PIs (who will read the executive summary, ie, the papers), but graduate
students will (and, incredible though it may seem, graduate students are people
too). The median paper is probably read by very few people too, by the way.

§

My thesis is a staple thesis: short intro, review, `paper
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2901896/>`__, `paper
<http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/26/12/i7.full>`__, `paper
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt392>`__, paper [yet unpublished],
short "conclusion", `software paper as appendix
<http://openresearchsoftware.metajnl.com/article/view/jors.ac>`__.

Have your cake and eat it too.  

I did, however, enjoy being able to write without any page limits and put in
more details than made it into the final version of the papers. I also put in
some side comments that I thought were cool but on the periphery of what the
chapter was about. In some ways, I had the opportunity to write down the type
of thought I would now cut out of the paper and put on the blog.

§

This is not to say that you shouldn't publish in peer-reviewed outlets. You
should (as I said, my thesis is a staple thesis). But we shouldn't use bad
or out-of-date arguments, like *nobody reads your thesis*, for it.

You should publish because **your résumé looks better with publications than
with a thesis**. Theses are like assholes, everybody has one (everyone who is
applying to the sort of academic jobs we are discussing).

So, write your thesis **and** publish.

