1. `False Positives from Next-Generation Sequencing <http://massgenomics.org/2013/06/ngs-false-positives.html>`__

2. `What I look for in software papers <http://carlboettiger.info/2013/06/13/what-I-look-for-in-software-papers.html>`__

    I [frequently review] *software papers* which I define as publications
    whose primary purpose is to publicize a piece of scientific software and
    provide a traditional research product with hopes that it will receive
    citations and recognition from other researchers in grant and job reviews.
    To me **this feels very much like hacking the publication recognition
    system rather than the ideal way to recognize and track the role of
    software in research communities, but a very practical one in the current
    climate**.

3. `On the organic movement and charlatanism <http://kfolta.blogspot.de/2013/06/unintended-collateral-damage.html>`__

Unfortunately, charlatanism sells. When I was last in Portugal, I was
disappointed to find out that one of the organic stores I would to patronize
for their premium produce and such had gone over to mostly selling `small
bottles of holy water at $1000/gallon
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homeopathy>`__ and "natural pills". Their
salespeople went from scruffy to dressing in white coats.

4. I read `Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of
Nature Is Almost Certainly False
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0199919755/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0199919755&linkCode=as2&tag=mutualinform-20>`__
by Thomas Nagel.

Someone wrote about `What Money Can't Buy
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0374203032/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0374203032&linkCode=as2&tag=mutualinform-20>`__
that it *was wrong, but wrong in a way that many people are wrong. Therefore,
it is a useful contribution to articulate exactly that argument.* [#]_ In fact he writes:

    I would like to defend the untutored reaction of incredulity of the
    reductionist neo-Darwinian account of the origin and evolution of life.

For example, here he is again:

    In the available geological time since the first life forms appeared on
    earth, what is the likelihoo that, as a result of physical accident, a
    sequence of viable genetic mutations should have occurred that was
    sufficient to permit natural selection to produce the organisms that
    actually exist?

In the conclusion he calls neo-Darwinism *a heroic triumph of ideological
theory over common sense.*

Perhaps it is the task of philosophy (which we may as well call *the science of
the gaps*) to articulate common sense. But the celebration of ignorance that is
behind these claims is a bit silly.

5. Here is `a good comment on the book
<http://philosophyofbrains.com/2013/03/29/nagels-mind-and-cosmos.aspx>`__. I
think this is very much in line with *if you care about winning, belittle your
opponents arguments; if you care about truth, you improve their arguments for
them* (I think this was originally a Milton Friedman quote).

Neo-Darwinism perfectly explains why there are `zombies
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophical_zombie>`__. Once you have RNA,
zombies are just a matter of time. To explain conscienceness is a harder
problem.

.. [#] Of course, they are wrong in different ways. Michael Sandel is perhaps
   *morally wrong* in that his ideas cause a lot of unnecessary suffering and
   death (although, in another moral conception, those deaths are necessary and
   just—this is not something we can decide scientifically by looking at the
   world, but morally by deciding whether it is better that we preserve
   *purity* in some conception or that we avoid the *deaths of others*). Or he
   is *philosophically wrong* in that his ideas are contradictory.  On the
   other hand, Thomas Nagel is *scientifically wrong*.


