Some Links

1. A wonderful `explanation of Bergman divergences
<http://mark.reid.name/blog/meet-the-bregman-divergences.html>`__. I also
learned that cool result of Banerjee & Gou.

2. I liked `The Enduring Myth of the SPARQL Endpoint
<http://daverog.wordpress.com/2013/06/04/the-enduring-myth-of-the-sparql-endpoint/>`__.
This reminded of `Titus' remark` that *scaling is the only CS problem that
still matters*.

Money quote: *There is a reason there are no 'SQL Endpoints'.*

3. `Why proxy measures fail
<http://mathbabe.org/2013/06/04/how-proxies-fail/>`__: this applies to Journal
Impact Factor, but will also apply to altmetrics. In fact, we can read it as
arguing that *metrics that are not widely used look better than metrics that
are widely used*. But it is fallacious to expect that proposed metrics will not
go through the same process.

4. President of the AAAS `faked her PhD
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2013/06/03/leader-cambridge-prestigious-academy-arts-and-sciences-inflated-resume-falsely-claiming-doctorate/kWvnF95OTkI0HCVvBHe9XJ/story.html>`__.

5. `This battle will eventually reach biology
<http://egtheory.wordpress.com/2013/06/05/prediction-vs-understanding/>`__.
(This is a much better exposition of the problem than Chomsky's rants, by the
way).

I think it will be a while before we can just predict any biological behaviour
that is interesting, though.

However, how soon before somebody claims that

    Every time I fire a biologist, the performance of our biological
    predictior goes up.

Is the `curious task of machine learning is to demonstrate to men how little
they really know about what they imagine they can study
<http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Friedrich_Hayek>`__?


