Applied Rationality Workshop Notes

I just came home from an `Applied Rationality Workshop
<http://rationality.org/workshops/>`__, which means I just spent four days
talking about emotions, my emotions and other people's emotions. I exaggerate
for effect, but only slightly. If your image of rationality is Plato's image of
the rational `driver whipping the irrationally emotional horses
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chariot_Allegory>`__, then you are not talking
about the same things that are meant in this context.

This is not one part of your brain whipping another one sore, but having a
conversation between so that they can work together as a team.

If you want the one-sentence version (or my one-sentence version): *applied
rationality is about getting your minds to be a good team* [#]_.

A few random notes from the workshop:

**It was even better than I expected**. I had expected a positive experience,
with more highs than lows (or I wouldn't have made the significant investment
of going to the workshop). In fact, everything was excellent. Even topics that
I felt I already understood pretty well were often discussed in new ways, with
new connections to other material.

**All of the material is evidence-based to the best of current knowledge** and
there is a refreshing hesitancy to speculate and over-interpret. I have a bit
of an urge to call it *evidence-based New Age* or something similarly
contradictory to highlight the fact that there are many connections to that
movement in terms of some of the goals, but with a scientific approach.

**Everyone at CFAR is very smart and everyone is very different**.

**I learned a lot about teaching too**. Explicitly from one of the sessions,
but also tacitly from the way that the material was presented.

Having been away from Carnegie Mellon for a while, being back in such a
completely **nerdy environment** gave a positive sense of nostalgia. The
`Riemann hypothesis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riemann_hypothesis>`__ was
mentioned several times, metaphorically. Not all of the participants fit into
the stereotype (and perhaps neither do I), but it was certainly clear.

.. [#] and your body is one of your minds too.

