Paper Review: Dual Host-Virus Arms Races Shape an Essential Housekeeping Protein

    Dual Host-Virus Arms Races Shape an Essential Housekeeping Protein by Ann
    Demogines, Jonathan Abraham, Hyeryun Choe, Michael Farzan, and Sara L.
    Sawyer. PLoS Biol 11(5): e1001571. doi:`10.1371/journal.pbio.1001571
    <http://doi.dx.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001571>`__

This paper is not really related to my research, but I always enjoy a good cell
biology story. My review is thus mostly a retelling of what I think were the
highlights of the story.

    In wild rodent populations, the retrovirus MMTV and New World arenaviruses
    both exploit Transferrin Receptor 1 (TfR1) to enter the cells of their
    hosts. Here we show that the physical interactions between these viruses
    and TfR1 have triggered evolutionary arms race dynamics that have directly
    modified the sequence of TfR1 and at least one of the viruses involved. 

What is most interesting is that TfR1 is a housekeeping gene involved in iron
uptaking, which is essential for survival. Thus, it is probably highly
constrained in its defensive evolution as even a small loss of function can be
deleterious for the host.

The authors looked at the specific residues which seem to mutate rapidly in
rodent species and they map to known virus/protein contact regions (which are
known from X-ray crystallography).

Interestingly, the same evolutionary patterns are visible in rodent species
*for which no known virus use this entry point*. However (and this is cool) we
can find *viral fossils* in the genome of these rodents (i.e., we can parts of
the viral sequence in the genome, which indicate that somewhere in the
evolutionary past of these animals, a retrovirus integrated into the genome).

ยง

This process also explains why some viruses infect some species and not others:
divergent evolution of the virus itself to catch up with the defensive
evolution of different hosts makes them unable to infect across species. Thus,
whenever the host mutates, it forces the virus gene to make an awkward choice:
does it want to chase the new host surface and specialize to this species or
let this species go as a possible target?

