This afternoon, I sat in the Bioimage Informatics Proceedings session.

**Automated cellular annotation for high-resolution images of adult
Caenorhabditis elegans** by Sarah J. Aerni et al. [`DOI
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt223>`__]

Work uses C. elegans for studying development, where we can uniquely identy all
959 cells. The question is how to do so automatically as it takes hours/days to
do so viusally.

Unlike previous work, they use morphological features of cells and not just
expected location. They also allow for variable cell division. The result is
higher accuracy in labeled data.

**FuncISH: learning a functional representation of neural ISH images** by *Noa
Liscovitch* et al. [`DOI <http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt207>`__]

(`I blogged about this paper before
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/07/03/paper-review-funcish-learning-a-functional-representation-of-neural-ish-images/>`__)

This work looks at gene expression in the brain. Images are represented using
local features. They *do not use the scale invariance of the SIFT
representation* as the images are all at the same scale.

The genes are mapped to functional annotations, which is more effective than
the previously published baselines, which only used the images. This can pick
up similarity of genes that are expressed in different cell regions.

**Automated annotation of gene expression image sequences via non-parametric
factor analysis and conditional random fields** by *Iulian Pruteanu-Malinici*
et al. [`DOI <http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt206>`__]

Work with in-situ hybridization images on Drosophila embryos across genes and
time. Features were extracted using a sparse Bayesian factor model. Then, the
temporal aspect of the data is modeled using a conditional random field, which
improves results when compared to considering the inputs as independent.

**A high-throughput framework to detect synapses in electron microscopy
images** by *Saket Navlakha* et al. [`DOI
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt222>`__]

Presentation of methodological advances in detecting synapses, involving both
new laboratorial and new computational methods. The basic lab technique was a
now-unused 50 year-old method. The most interesting aspect is that the
experimental technique is justified *because it makes (automatic) analysis
easier*.

They also tackled the typically ignore problem of generalizing a model learned
on a particular set of samples to a new set of *similar but not quite the same*
of samples. They empirically showed that `Co-training
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Co-training>`__ works well for this problem if
you are careful. Nice!


