Having just spent some posts discussing a paper on `nuclear segmentation
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/09/11/nuclear-segmentation-in-microscope-cell-images/>`__
(`all tagged posts <http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/tag/coelho2009_isbi/>`__),
let me ask the question:

*Is cell segmentation needed? Is this a necessary step in an analysis pipeline
dealing with fluorescent cell images?*

This is a common FAQ whenever I give a talk on my work which does not use
segmentation, for example, using `local features for classification
<https://metarabbit.wordpress.com/tag/coelho2013_bioinformatics/>`__ (see `the
video <http://bit.ly/coelho2013-video>`__). It is a FAQ because, for many
people, it seems obvious that the answer is that *Yes, you need cell
segmentation*. So, when they see me skip that step, they ask: *shouldn't you
have segmented the cell regions?*

Here is my answer:

Remember Vapnik's dictum [#]_: *do not solve, as an step problem, a harder
problem than the problem you really need to solve.*

Thus the question becomes: *is your scientific problem dependent on cell
segmentation?* In the case, for example, of subcellular location determination,
it is not: all the cells in the same field display the same phenotype, your
goal being the find out what it is. Therefore, you do not need to have an
answer for each cell, only for the whole field.

In other problems, you may need to have a per-cell answer: for example in some
kinds of RNAi experiment only a fraction of the cells in a field display the
RNAi phenotype and the others did not take up the RNAi. Therefore, segmentation
may be necessary. Similarly, if a measurement such as *distance of fluoresccent
bodies to cell membrane* is meaningful, by itself (as opposed to being used as
a feature for classification), then you need segmentaion.

However, sometimes you can get away without segmentation.

ยง

An important point to note is the following: while it may be good to have
access to perfect classification, imperfect classification (i.e., the type you
actually get), may not help as much as the perfect kind.

ยง

Just to be sure, I was not the first person to notice that you do not need
segmentation for subcellular location determination. I think this is the first reference:

    Huang, Kai, and Robert F. Murphy. "Automated classification of subcellular
    patterns in multicell images without segmentation into single cells."
    Biomedical Imaging: Nano to Macro, 2004. IEEE International Symposium on.
    IEEE, 2004. [`Google scholar link
    <http://scholar.google.de/scholar?cluster=12709516786266993777&hl=en&as_sdt=0,5&as_vis=1>`__]

.. [#] I'm quoting from memory. It may a bit off. It sounds obvious when you
   put it this way, but it is still often not respected in practice.

