(I missed the first half of the first talk, so I won't include it. Also, the
internet is not good enough for me to get all the links. Sorry)

**Of Men and Not Mice: Comparative Genomic Analysis of Human Diseases and Mouse
Models** by *Wenzhong Xiao*

Wenzhong Xiao presented an empirical study of correlation between immune
response of mice and men. The correlations were very low, which is a warning to
be careful in interpreting animal models results.

An audience member raised the possibility of using humanized models, which was
a great point. I'll add that the immune system and immune system dysfunction
may be where mice and men differ the most and results there do not invalidate
results in other areas of study.

**Impact of genetic dynamics and single-cell heterogeneity on development of
nonstandard personalized medicine strategies for cancer** by *Chen-Hsiang
Yeang*

Simulation study of using different strategies for cancer treatment in the
present of resistant mutations. "The current system is often like a greedy
algorithm: do X until resistance to X emerges, switch to Y. Repeat. Better
strategies are possible."

Very interesting points come out of simple models, but it felt like the start
of a conversation rather than an answer.

Interesting presentation detail: author used references to video games as one
would use references to literature 100 years ago.

**Systems-based metatranscriptomic analysis** by *Xuejian Xiong*.

Original Paper: `He, D., Miao, M., Sitarz, E.E., Muiznieks, L.D., Reichheld,
S., Stahl, R.J., Keeley, F.W. and Parkinson, J. (2012) Polymorphisms in the
Human Tropoelastin Gene Modify in vitro Self-Assembly and Mechanical Properties
of Elastin-like Polypeptides. PLoS ONE. 7(9): e46130
<http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0036009>`__

Study on non-obese diabetic mice with Illumina sequencing. They projected their
reads into enzyme space to perform analysis at the metabolic network level.

Interesting technical points: they use alignment in peptide space instead of
nucleotide space to get around variability in codon encoding. They also found
that Trinity worked best for their data.


