For the `Lisbon Machine Learning School <http://lxmls.it.pt>`__, we ran
tutorials using `Amazon Webservices <http://aws.amazon.com>`__.

Amazon was kind enough to sponsor the event and so we could provide the
students the experience of running stuff on Elastic MapReduce.

Amazon gave us the option of managing the credits centrally or having each
student receive them on their own account. For a semester long course, the
latter option would have been preferrable as it simplifies management while
giving the students more power. However, for a 2-day tutorial inside a 1-week
event, it would have been a mess. Most of the students probably don't even have
credit cards, which are not so common outside the US [#]_.

Setting this up was a lot of work and so I am writing a very technical post in
the hope of helping someone else in the same situation.

§

This is the set up we ended up with:

1.  There are two users on the account, a *super* user and a *student* user.
    They have their own AWS Access/Secret key pairs. The *super* user is the
    major account user and can do everything. The *student* user can upload to
    a single S3 bucket we provide and can submit jobs to elastic mapreduce.
    Otherwise, the *student* user cannot allocate new resources.
2.  Each student will have their private EC2 machine and Elastic Map Reduce
    cluster. All of them are using the same *student* user, but get different
    machines.

**Details**

We prepare the following for EC2/S3:

1. An SSH key pair (we will call it ``lxmls_ie`` here).
2. A security group where port 22 is open (``quick-start-1``)
3. An instance profile.
4. An S3 bucket.

We got as many machines ready as we had students::

    ec2-run-instances \
        --iam-profile arn:aws:iam::168723129637:instance-profile/student \
        --region eu-west-1 \
        --instance-count $NR_STUDENTS \
        --verbose --key=lxmls_ie --instance-type=t1.micro ami-3d160149 --group quick-start-1

We request an instance per student [#]_. We wait for amazon to boot up all the
machines, and query for them::

    urls=`ec2-describe-instances --region eu-west-1 |gawk '/^INSTANCE.*arn:aws:iam::168723129637:instance-profile.student/ { print $4 }'`

I think in the end this is the major use of the instance-profile: it allows me
to distinguish the student machines from the support machines [#]_.

Now, we run the following::

    for url in $urls; do
        password=`pwgen --num-passwords=1`
        ./initialize-instance.sh $url $password >>log.txt 2>>log2.txt
        echo "$url	$password" >>host_passwords.txt
    done

We are generating a new password (with the ``pwgen`` utility) and calling an
``initialize-instance.sh`` script for each url with a new password. That script
looks like this::

    # Get parameters
    url=$1
    password=$2

    ssh -i lxmls_ie.pem -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no  -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null  ubuntu@$url <<EOF

This line means we are going to be sshing  using the key ``lxmls_ie.pem`` we
used for creating the machines. To have this automated, we need to avoid the
RSA host key warning, hence the ``-o`` settings. Then, we pass it a here doc
with a long init script (I actually simplified a bit below, adapt as needed).

First we get some software we'll use::

    sudo apt-get install -y python-numpy emacs nano
    sudo pip install boto --upgrade
    sudo pip install mrjob

Now, we set the password that was generated for this machine and configure sshd
to accept password-based logini (by default, EC2 machines accept publickey
only)::

    (echo $password ; echo $password) | sudo passwd ubuntu
    sudo sed 's/PasswordAuthentication no/PasswordAuthentication yes/' -i /etc/ssh/sshd_config

We configure mrjob to use the right s3 buckets & install the packages we want::

    cat >~/.mrjob.conf <<MRJOB_EOF
    runners:
      emr:
        aws_region: eu-west-1
        s3_log_uri: s3://lxmls-labs-scratch/
        s3_scratch_uri: s3://lxmls-labs-scratch/
        ec2_key_pair: lxmls_student
        ec2_key_pair_file: /home/ubuntu/.lxmls_student.pem
        bootstrap_python_packages:
        - /home/ubuntu/.emr_packages/*.tar.gz
    MRJOB_EOF

We get a prepared environment and expand it (this also fills in the
``.emr_packages`` directory mentioned in configuration file)::

    wget https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/lxmls-labs/initial.tar.gz
    tar xzf initial.tar.gz
    rm initial.tar.gz

Now, we initialize a persistent job flow, using 4 machines::

    export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=SUPER_KEY
    export AWS_SECRET_KEY=SUPER_KEY
    export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=SUPER_KEY
    export AWS_ACCESS_KEY=SUPER_KEY

    mrjob create-job-flow  --num-ec2-instances=4 > your-jobflow-id.txt

We also set it to visible and write it to the mrjob configuration file::

    python <<PYTHON_EOF
    import boto.emr
    conn = boto.emr.connect_to_region('eu-west-1')
    jobflow=open('/home/ubuntu/your-jobflow-id.txt').read().strip()
    conn.set_visible_to_all_users(jobflow, True)

    mrjob_conf = open('/home/ubuntu/.mrjob.conf', 'a')
    mrjob_conf.write('    emr_job_flow_id: {}\n'.format(jobflow))
    mrjob_conf.close()
    PYTHON_EOF


Finally, we set up the student key in their environment and reboot for good
luck::

    echo export AWS_ACCESS_KEY=STUDENT_KEY >> ~/.bashrc
    echo export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=STUDENT_KEY >> ~/.bashrc
    echo export AWS_SECRET_KEY=STUDENT_KEY >> ~/.bashrc
    echo export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=STUDENT_KEY >> ~/.bashrc

    sudo reboot
    EOF

All of this gets us a running machine that is accessible in two ways: using the
``lxmls_ie.pem`` keypair or with a password. We give the students the URL and
password (and keep the ``lxmls_ie.pem`` backdoor if we need to fix something
last minute).


Note that the super keys are used in the initialization script, but they are
not saved to the machine. Only the student keys are saved to the machine.

Each student also got a running Elastic Mapreduce instance. It is idle, but it
will accept jobs from the student. Here is the major trick: the *student* user
is allowed to submit jobs to EMR but only the *super* user is allowed to start
new job flows (ie, allocate resources). For this, you need the following
permissions in the IAM for the student user::

        { "Action": [ "s3:GetObject", "s3:ListBucket"],
          "Resource": [
            "arn:aws:s3:::lxmls-labs",
            "arn:aws:s3:::lxmls-labs/*" ],
          "Effect": "Allow" },
        { "Action": [ "s3:*" ],
          "Resource": [
            "arn:aws:s3:::lxmls-labs-scratch",
            "arn:aws:s3:::lxmls-labs-scratch/*", ],
          "Effect": "Allow" },
        { "Action": "elasticmapreduce:*",
          "Resource": "*",
          "Effect": "Allow" },
        { "Action": "ec2:*",
          "Resource": "*",
          "Effect": "Deny" }

(The super user is your account user and has all permissions set.)

**Advantages**

1. Everything works the first time without too much configuration. In the first
version of these tutorials, the students had to handle keys themselves and it
was very confusing in testing (we tested all our tutorials).

2. We have perfect control over what the students will see. The data and
libraries we expected them to use are already pre-installed. In a short
tutorial, this saves valuable time.

3. Having a pre running jobflow saves initialization time. Starting up an
Elastic Mapreduce cluster takes about 5 minutes if you have to provision
machines.

**Disadvantages**

1. From my personal point of view, the major disadvantage is that it is all very
magical: it works perfectly in demo, but the students don't learn enough to be
able to do it themselves. Frankly, though, 6 hours is too little for them to
learn AWS, which is a completely new operating system.

2. The second major disadvantage is that a running jobflow will not give you
good error messages! I did not find any good way for students to get good error
messages if they make a mistake in the code they submit.

3. It is possible for a student to mess up everyone else's clusters if they
know the AWS system well enough. [#]_ We really don't expect this and would deal
with it as a major breach of ethics (and kick out the offending party
immediately). However, I would be very very surprised if this happened.  Over a
long semester, people start to learn and play around, they get dumb ideas...
In two days?  We were always more worried about someone inadvartently
allocating a million machines by mistyping something and costing us too much
money. We wanted to protect against Murphy, not Machievalli.

4. It is inefficient to idle the machines like this. Not a major argument since
we only ran them during the tutorials. Amazon charges you for partial hours
anyway, so if you run it for five hours during a tutorial, this might even be
less than what the students would do if they were testing multiple versions of
the code and booting up new machines every time. We can shut them down between
the two tutorial days to save a bit of money.

5. I might have missed a big hole in this configuration. AWS is a big operating
system and I have not yet understood all of it.

§

If you are really running this, feel free to `email me
<mailto:luis@luispedro.org>`__ for details.

Also, **important**: you need to ask Amazon well in advance for enough quota to
allocate so many machines at once! [#]_

.. [#] Lest you think that this is a sign of a simpler, gentler, form of living
   (yes, I'm looking at you, American liberal); I'll point out that consumer
   credit is very common and aggressively sold, almost always in forms that are
   *way worse* than the American credit card and in the context of harsher
   bankrupcy laws.

.. [#] We encouraged students to work in groups if they preferred (which they
   often did). Feel free to read *group of students of size 1 or greater*
   everytime I write *student*, but I did not want to encumber the exposition.

.. [#] They can submit jobs to any of the other student's clusters. I am not
   sure how they can query for all the clusters running accessible to that
   user, but if they can, they could just jam everyone else's work.

.. [#] We had a support machine for testing &c running all the time and
   sometimes booted up a fresh one just for testing.

.. [#] We actually did not realize this until too late and had to work around
   the limitations by spreading the students around the world (figuratively
   speaking), so that some were running machines in Ireland, others in US,
   others in São Paulo... It all worked in the end, but I had to set it up for
   each region (and write scripts that are region aware). We had the setup I
   describe replicated for each region (we did not need all the regions, but
   most of them).

