Title: People are Right Not to Share Code...
--

... but we are wrong to let them get away with it.

Last week, a preprint of an article discussing code sharing made the following
remarks:


On Hacker News, a working astrophysicist voiced his concerns:

We have what is called a **collective action problem**: it seems there is wide
agreement that it would be best for everyone if everyone shared, but individual
incentives are to defect (not share). The best for the individual is to be able
to use everyone's code, but not share any of their own. The result is that few
share.

Yes, there are advantages to sharing. Overall, though, I do think that people
are, for the most part, selfishly correct to not share. Note that the code that
is not shared is probably of worse quality and less useful than code that is
already shared (because there was no random assignment of sharing/not sharing
decisions).

How do we handle a collective action problem? We can have the state pass a law
that everyone must share. This will probably not happen (first of all, there is
no single state as science is very international).

We can rely on people behaving morally. Frankly, I do science for mostly
non-selfish reasons: I could make way more money by working on how to make
people click on ads or tricking rich people out of their money in a hedge fund,
but I really prefer to do something I find worthwhile (this is on the margin,
it does not mean that I'd work for subsistence wages, I'm not a monk).
Therefore, I find it a bit odd to then behave in a way that does not benefit
the wider community. Sure, I'll play the game around the edges, but if it was
about extracting maximal personal benefit, I could do better than this.

Moral behaviour alone, however, is not enough. While 20th century thinking was
that collective action needed state intervention, Elinor Olstrom showed that
communities can often solve a problem even without Leviathan.

In fact, Science is exactly the sort of polycentric, overlapping authority
system that her work studied. There are funders (public and private), journals,
universities and other institutes, all the way down to individual PIs in their
groups. All of these authorities make decisions that impact others, some are
more important than others but none is all powerful (the NIH is problem the
single most important player, but even they only control a fraction of world
research). Interestingly, all of these authorities act based on peer-review and
feedback. This is an ingrained part of the culture. Therefore, whatever the
community consensus is, it will get filtered through.

Therefore, if the community consensus is that not sharing is not cool,
decisions will be made in that direction.

If you are evaluating a paper (as editor or peer-reviewer), you can ask about
the code (or even just praise the authors that do release code, implying that
that makes you more supportive of publication; in certain marginal decisions,
it should make the difference between publication and rejection). By the way,
be hard on authors who do not cite the software they use.

The same is true of grant evaluations: do the authors mention what will happen
to the code? Particularly in a public funding setting, you are representing the
interests of the tax payer. If code will be released as open source, this is
probably a better contribution for the society at large. The government funds
scientists to produce intelectual public goods, not so that they can get a lot
of high profile papers (actually, in small countries, the government is often
funding science for the prestige of high profile papers; so this applies mostly
to countries with high self-esteem).

The tension is not so clear in the case of hiring and tenure decisions as the
institution will often reap the same selfish benefits as the individual
researcher for not sharing code (but if you are an external evaluator, you can
consider this in evaluating whether that person has made a contribution that is
valued by the whole community).

Until we align private and public incentives, I think that denying that this
tension exists by claiming that it really is in your interest to share will
fail. It will fail because it is not true.
