IMPACT or How I Learned to Start Worrying and Fear Altmetrics

`Altmetrics <http://altmetrics.org/manifesto/>`__ is the idea that scientific
publications should be judged (perhaps primarily) on the impact they have in
the general media, including on social media. This is in alternative to looking
at either citations of journal impact factors.

ยง

People who know me outside of science know that antibiotic overuse is a pet
peeve of mine [#]_. We just published a paper touching on this very subject. It
also touched on antibiotic use in agriculture. Both of these can be sold as hot
subjects and it'd certainly be possible to try to get some attention in social
media with a few bolder statements: *antibiotic use in factory farming causes
antibiotic resistant infections!*

Oh, the altmetrics would go through the roof, but we don't have the data to
support anything like that claim. Our data and analysis is congruent with the
idea that antibiotic overuse by humans and farm animals leads to increased
resistance which may lead to increased antibiotic resistant infections, but we
**must** acknowledge that there are a large number of confounders (broadly
speaking, cultures that like to give their animals antibiotics also take a
bunch themselves, thus we cannot disentangle farm-to-fork from more human
antibiotic usage) and lack of direct causality (presence of antibiotic
resistant genes is not sufficient to indicate antbiotic resistant pathogens).

We wrote as good scientists, presenting our data and conclusions, acknowledging
limitations. We hope to get scientific recognition for this. Most directly in
the form of citations, naturally, but more generally in recognition (*oh, those
people in the Bork lab did a really good job both on their own data and in
reviewing other work*).

If our incentives were to stir up controversy in social networks, then they
would point away from this towards a more polemical stance (and whilst they
may, in some sense, draw more engagement with scientific results, they would,
in a more fundamental sense, move the discourse away from a evidence-based
direction [#]_).

When writing blogposts, I put in short sentences for twitter; it'd be dangerous
if I did the same when writing a journal paper.

ยง

Metrics don't just measure, they also shape behaviour, you need to `solve for
the equilibrium
<http://marginalrevolution.com/?s=Solve+for+the+equilibrium>`__. Would it be a
good thing if people started, on the margin, to optimze for your metric?

ยง

An unrelated criticism of altmetrics is that they'd be `outright gamed
<http://scholarlyoa.com/2013/08/01/article-level-metrics/>`__ and that the
scientific world has nowhere close to the capacity to fight spam like google et
al. do. The linked article is also notable for using the word *meretricious* in
the title.

.. [#] I'm the sort of guy that when a person complains that their doctor
   didn't give them antibiotics for the flu is liable to praise the doctor
   instead of expressing empathy.

.. [#] In fact, public diffusion of speculative scientific results can lead to
   mistrust of science as these speculative results will then tend to
   contradict themselves.

