Year in Review: Blogposts

During 2013, this blog had over 40k reads; I only started blogging in May (here's
the `first post <https://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/05/03/first-post/>`__),
so I'm pretty happy about that number 

I suppose it's traditional to have a look at the most read posts of the past
year on your blog; so here's my top 7.

1. The single most read post on the blog was `Building Machine Learning Systems
with Python
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/05/31/building-machine-learning-systems-with-python/>`__
which talked about my (then upcoming, now published) `book
<http://www.amazon.com/Building-Machine-Learning-Systems-Python/dp/1782161406>`__. It got 18k reads.

2. At less 6.6k reads, we have a defense of Python against Matlab: `Why Python is Better than Matlab for
Scientific Software
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/10/18/why-python-is-better-than-matlab-for-scientific-software/>`__.

3. With 3.1k reads, `Python “lists” are not lists. A history
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/12/03/python-lists-are-not-lists-a-history/>`__

4. Finally, at number four and 0.8k reads, we get to sciency things: `How Long
Does Plos One Take to Accept A Paper?
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/06/03/how-long-does-plos-one-take-to-accept-a-paper/>`__
(see also the `follow up
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/06/05/how-long-does-plos-take-to-review-a-paper-all-plos-journals-now/>`__,
which includes all PLoS journals). However, while the first 2 went viral at one
point, then interest died away, this seems to still be read every day.

5. `A few interesting statistical facts
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/05/13/a-few-interesting-statistical-facts/>`__
was one of my first posts and I still like it. Maybe I should have called these
`controversial
<http://www.businessinsider.com/the-most-controversial-math-problems-2013-3>`__
which is a stupid word to use in this context (surprising, interesting, cool,
unintuitive), but apparently gets you more readers.

6. `Segmenting Images In Parallel With Python & Jug
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/05/20/segmenting-images-in-parallel-with-python-jug/>`__
was a tutorial on using `mahotas <http://mahotas.readthedocs.org/en/latest/>`__
and `jug <http://mahotas.readthedocs.org/en/latest/>`__.

7. Finally, at number seven, a tongue-in-cheek reflection on the economics of
science: `Science is a Third-world Economy
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/10/02/why-science-is-a-third-world-economy/>`__
(tl;dr because people are cheap and things are expensive).

