This was going to be a link for a Friday Links, but it quickly expanded from a
comment to a full post.

ยง

A glimpse of the future. `Oh, no, it's algorithms!
<http://www.nationalnursesunited.org/press/entry/nurses-launch-new-campaign-to-alert-public-to-dangers-of-medical-technology/>`__

(tl;dr a nurse union warns against using "algorithms" for diagnostic, saying
that you should ask for a nurse's judgement)

This is heavy on the tropes used against `evidence based medicine
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evidence-based_medicine>`__ in general [#]_, with
the basic argument being that "we cannot rely on conclusions from statistics
because each individual case is different".

The point that is more directly related to computers (or algorithms) is that
"algorithms are simple mathematical formulas that nobody understands".
Naturally, the "simple" was sarcastic, *simple mathematical formula* being an
oxymoron.

In fact, some of the algorithms can use a complex formula that nobody
understands. The systems get so complex that it starts to make sense to talk
about *the computer's intution*. The leaps of logic to arrive at a correct
solution are too complex to be followed. The system cannot be comprehended.
This is true not just "in practice", but, for practical purposes, "in
principle". By this I mean two things: (1) the amount of effort required to
retrace the computations becomes too large. When google returns a specific page
in return to a query, the amount of computation that would be required to
reproduce that by hand might be longer than the life of the universe. In
addition, even in cases where the result can be traced, there might be no
there there, no insight. We'd be inside the Chinese Room [#]_.

We cannot, however fall for the easy `Nirvana fallacy
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nirvana_fallacy>`__. We currently already often
rely on uncomprehensible intuition, just that it is human intuition. But the
exact reasoning of a doctor is not always retraceable: this case matches some
explicitly learned rule or some previously observed cases (this is exactly what
the computer does by the way). A little species pride makes us want to be
better at this game than computers are, but that should remain an empirical
question, liable to be tested and disproved.

ยง

In fact, in order to move towards personalized medicine, we probably need more
computers and automated diagnostic. Nurses can nurse and the basic sort of
medicine that we have today can be provided by humans (although it can become
more costumer service than reasoning [#]_), but only hyper-specialized doctors
will have a shot at the sort of reasoning that is necessary to be able to truly
deliver personalized medicine.

    Dr. Smith, here are the patients DNAs from a wide body-site sampling [#]_,
    a full record of the patients biological activity over the last two weeks.
    The full history is, of course, available from the online system.

I mean, seriously, this is beyond human cognitive abilities. There is nothing
wrong with this. Humans are just not very good at computing.

If you really want to be treated as an individual, you will need more, not
fewer computers.

ยง

Also note this public choice story [#]_: *Observation is the latest fad in
large part because Medicare reimbursement penalties for patients re-admitted
within 30 days for the same illness do not apply if the patient was discharged
from an observation unit*. `Goodhart's Law
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodhart%27s_Law>`__ strikes again.

.. [#] There are issues with evidence-based medicine, yes; but they are not as
   bad as the issues with the alternative.
.. [#] Like many philosophical arguments, the Chinese Room is a bad argument,
   but an useful metaphor.
.. [#] One person one genome is so 2010.
.. [#] We already see with the rise of nurse-practicioners that the system is
   catching up to the notion that having MDs perform customer service ("Let me
   read what the results say on the computer. Now let me read this prescription
   for me.") is wasteful.
.. [#] The whole thing is classic public choice: a special interest group
   trying to derail the public good for private benefit (last time I checked,
   American healthcare was very expensive; but these adds portrait attempts at
   cost savings as mean-spirited). It's also interesting that nurses have more
   recently greatly benefitted from the trend of replacing more expensive
   doctors in many contexts (but that cost cutting was not mean-spirited).

