Modernity

The `Bourne shell was first released in 1977
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bourne_shell>`__ (37 years ago).

The `C Programming Language book was published in 1978
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_C_Programming_Language>`__ (36 years ago),
describing the C language which had been out for a few years.

Python was first released in 1991 (23 years ago). The first version that looks
very much like the current Python was `version 2.2, released in 2001
<https://www.python.org/download/releases/2.2>`__ (13 years ago), but the code
from Python 1.0.1 is already pretty familiar to my eyes.

The future might point in the direction of functional languages such as
Haskell, which first appeared in 1990 (24 years ago), although the first modern
version is from 1998 (`Haskell 98 <http://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/>`__).

`Vim was first released in 1991
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vim_(text_editor)>`__, based on `vi released in
1976 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi>`__. Some people prefer Emacs, `released
a bit earlier <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emacs>`__ (GNU Emacs, however, is
fairly recent, `only released in 1985`; so 19 years ago)

The web was `first implemented in 1989 with some preliminary work in the early
1980s <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_World_Wide_Web>`__ (although
the idea of `hypertext had been around for longer
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1945/07/as-we-may-think/303881/>`__).

ยง

The only really new software I use regularly is `distributed version control
systems <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_revision_control>`__, which
are less than 20 years old in both implementation and ideas.


