Haven't They Suffered Enough?

Every time I read about a plan to have more women and minority in science
careers, I think of that famous `New Yorker quip about gays getting married
<http://www.condenaststore.com/-sp/Gays-and-lesbians-getting-married-haven-t-they-suffered-enough-New-Yorker-Cartoon-Prints_i8544598_.htm>`__:

*Gays getting married? Haven't they suffered enough?*

*Women in tenure-track positions? Haven't they suffered enough?*

ยง

I read `this rant
<http://anothersb.blogspot.de/2014/03/my-life-as-phd-scientist-you-should.html>`__ yesterday:

    I was the lucky kid who never had to study for tests.  I always scored in
    the 99% percentile on the annual state assessments.
    
    [... Now I don't make that much money.]

    The national average at the time was that for every one faculty position,
    there were 200 applications.  For our department, there were 300
    applications for every one faculty position

    [...]

    Science will fail because the System is running the scientists out of it.

This is like *nobody goes there anymore, it's too crowded*. In one sense it
expresses a truth, but it is actually non-sensical.

The problem with science cannot simmultaneously be that scientists are not
sufficiently paid and that there are too many of them for the same position.

ยง

If you want to make the argument that there should be more science funding, go
ahead, I'll support you 100%.

If you want to make the argument that postdoc salaries are so low that it's
hard to get a qualified candidate, go ahead, I'll mostly disagree.

If you want to make the argument that the current system leads to sub-optimal
science, go ahead, I might support or disagree depending on the details. In the
comments to that article someone points out that in the current system PIs are
incentivized to be overly conservative and focused on the short-term unlike the
private sector which has a longer time-horizon (and perhaps more tolerance for
failure). This sort of argument is much more interesting as it implies that
there could be better mechanisms.

ยง

But, reading these *poor me* laments, I actually conclude that the taxpayer is
getting a great deal: it gets very smart people working 80 hour days for so
little money that they cannot afford to go to the movies [#]_ and they even
produce a lot of nice results. Man, your tax dollars are hard at work!

Can we structure the rest of the public sector to be like this? [#]_ We'd get
excellent public services for much lower taxes (even the Council Tax which
seems to take such a big chunk of this poor fellow's salary).

.. [#] I have to say I don't fully believe this.

.. [#] Joking aside, I actually think that science funding is, in general,
   better than other types of funding at getting bang-for-public-buck. Tenure
   comes late in your career (and it is not enough to sit on your ass and not
   get fired for 2 years), the grant system is competitive, &c In spite of the
   fact that public funding dominates, very few people would argue that there
   is no competition in science.
