PSA: Invest in index funds

We live in a sort of reverse victorian age: it's easier to talk of sexual
matters than of money [#]_. I have recently been surprised at how ignorant even
highly educated Europeans are about their financial possibilities [#]_. I meet
people with large sums in savings accounts where the money is just sitting
there or in hare-brained "investment" schemes. So, this is a bit of public
service announcement, although there is a particular point that applies mostly
to scientists.

**Invest in index funds**. An index fund is a fund which buys a large number of
stocks (for example, the stocks that make up the S&P 500). You want ones with
low fees (<0.5% per year) and a few that make a diverse range, but seriously it
does not matter what you have as it'll always be better than nothing or a
savings account.

You should just assume that markets are efficient, Now, there is a debate in
academic circles whether they are 99.9999% efficient (i.e., people who think
they are efficient) or only 95% efficient (people who disagree). But if there
are market inefficiencies, they'll be exploited by professional hedge funds,
not you in your free time. So, just assume that markets are efficient, you
cannot beat them, and strive to minimize the amount you pay in fees [#]_.

Index funds are investment, not speculation, your goal is to collect dividends,
not necessarily have the fund rise in price! If you buy a fund at the price 100
and later sell it at the price of 90, you might still have made money if you
made more than 10 in dividends [#]_. More typical however, is that you buy at
100, sell at 116 a few years later and will have collected 82 in dividends over
that period (Some people don't even know this basic fact of how these things
work and are surprised when I mention dividends as a large part of the return I
expect from my investments).

To actually buy these, you need a brokerage account. I use `TD Direct Investing
<http://int.tddirectinvesting.com/>`__ in Europe, but others exist. Your bank
will generally not help you and will try to sell you products where they make
large fees (it's like going to a Chrysler dealer and telling them you know that
Toyota/Honda have much better value for money, but could they please help
you choose between an Accord and a Camry? [#]_).

**Do not pick stocks as it can lead to conflicts of interest** I could again
just say *don't pick stocks, assume markets are efficient*, but an additional
reason for me and for any scientist is that owning stock of particular
companies is a conflict of interest if you ever have to evaluate anything which
touches (even peripherally) on anything the company does.  Note that a conflict
of interest will not immediately translate to a bias and the practice in
science is to disclose the conflicts without completely dismissing the speaker,
but if you're writing scientific papers or reviewing them, why force yourself
to disclose a conflict when you could just as easily avoided the issue by not
owning the stock in the first place? Further, it is an unnecessary risk that
you unintentionally fail to disclose and someone will later point out that your
paper on how X protein binds with Y protein conveniently fit with your
ownership of pharma P' stock as they have a large investiment on an X-inhibitor
[#]_. We scientists already have to spend too much time defending ourselves of
the accusation that we are just flaks for Big Pharma or Monsanto, so just don't
own their stock.

**If you're thinking about buying gold, consider buying a gun instead**. This
is tongue-in-cheek, but there is this persistent idea that owning gold is a
good idea because when the revolution comes, money and stocks will be worthless
as civilization collapses. But when civilization has collapsed and we are all
back in the state of nature where life is *nasty, brutish, and short*, a gun is
even better than gold. If you have gold and your neighbour has a gun... well,
at the end of the day, your neighbour will still have the gun, but you might
have lost your gold. When civilization collapses, you'll want to be `the one
who knocks <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HH9IiHMD2M>`__.

So, if you're worried about the incoming collapse of civilization into a
Hobbesian nightmare, consider buying a gun. [#]_

Back in the real world, gold is still a bad proposition, subject to volatile
prices. Volatile means that (1) you can make large profits if you guess the
time to sell&buy and (2) you can lose a lot of money by guessing wrong.
However, you will likely not get the timing right. More importantly, unlike
stock/bonds or real estate, there is no inherent income stream from holding
gold. You are just betting that the price will go up. In recent years, perhaps
because of the recent strong growth in the world economy, particularly in China
and India (`Indian culture is obsessed with gold
<https://www.google.de/search?q=indian+culture+and+gold&oq=indian+culture+and+gold&aqs=chrome..69i57.3113j0j7&sourceid=chrome&es_sm=91&ie=UTF-8>`__)
or perhaps because of rich people panicking (or whatever [#]_), the prices of
gold have risen (although volatility is high: just last week, it lost 10%).
However, by buying now you might just be buying at the top of the growth curve
[#]_.

ยง

**Introductory pop intro to this stuff**

`I will teach you to be rich
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0761147489/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0761147489&linkCode=as2&tag=mutualinform-20>`__
by Ramit Sethi. Pretty basic stuff. One important point: if you do get a
finantial advisor, get one paid by the hour; not one that gets paid by
comission. You want to talk to an advisor, not a salesman.

.. [#] Arguably, much discussion of sex is not fully honest, particularly of
   the emotional/sexual nexus. Still, the point remains: it's easier to get
   someone in bed that to discuss their financials.

.. [#] Americans tend to be a bit better because there is less fatalism wrt
   retirement (many young Europeans are aware that their public pensions will
   be less than they were promised even just a few years ago, but they often
   just adopt a *whatever will be, will be* attitude, although there may be
   increasing interest in alternatives to putting your trust on the promises of
   politicians).

.. [#] I actually believe a pretty strong version of market efficiency and I
   think that the large profits of financial corporations come from
   rent-seeking (i.e., taxpayer bailouts) and charging high fees for things
   that are not worth a lot. Still, even you think that markets are not that
   great and that there is a lot of potential to earn money by being better
   than the markets, then it is still likely that it will not be you who'll do
   it.

.. [#] The example does not work so well for Europeans as a Fiat is much
   cheaper in Europe than Honda here so it's not so obvious that the Honda is
   better value for money as Fiats.

.. [#] Some funds do not pay dividends per se and instead are engineered so
   that the dividends from the stock they own get translated into a higher
   price even if the underlying securities has not moved in price. This has
   some tax advantages in some jurisdictions, but it works out to be the same.

.. [#] Nowadays, stock ownership is rarely mentioned as an important conflict
   of interest in published papers, but who knows how ethical fashions will
   evolve and where your career will be in 10 years when an enterprising
   journalist decides to expose you as the Monsanto-fundede Big Pharma flak
   that all scientists really are.

.. [#] My guess is that guns hold their resale value, making them a good store
   of value, but I couldn't really find data on this.

.. [#] This is another dependency on external factors that could potentially be
   a conflict of interest.

.. [#] I'd write top of the bubble, but I don't think bubbles are a very useful
   concept. Gold is still as likely to go up as to go down or just to stay the
   same. If it goes down, we'll retrospectively call it a bubble and whoever
   buys now will be labeled a sucker; in that case it'll be obvious we were in
   a bubble now. If it doesn't go down, well it `will be obvious that gold is
   now a golden opportunity <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hindsight_bias>`__

