1. You know when in TV, they zoom in on an image to a ridiculous level of
resolution? What a joke!

Actually, even though the TV shows exaggerate how much you can extract from an
image, see the video on:

    *Identifiable Images of Bystanders Extracted from Corneal Reflections* by
    Rob Jenkins and Christie Kerr in PLoS One, 2013 [`DOI
    <http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0083325>`__]

And the joke is on us.

2. `The homogenization of scientific computing, or why Python is steadily
eating other languages’ lunch
<http://www.r-bloggers.com/the-homogenization-of-scientific-computing-or-why-python-is-steadily-eating-other-languages-lunch/>`__

This is pretty much what I said before about Python: for scientific computing,
Python is rarely the best language for any single task, but it's almost always
the second best choice and the only one who can span all the necessary areas.

3. `Myths of organic farming
<http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/science-sushi/2011/07/18/mythbusting-101-organic-farming-conventional-agriculture/>`__

4. `I had the healthiest childhood imaginable. And yet I was sick all the time.
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/family/2014/01/growing_up_unvaccinated_a_healthy_lifestyle_couldn_t_prevent_many_childhood.html>`__

This article seems to fight the good fight (it's pro-vaccines), but gives half
the game away to the idiots on the other side:

    I was brought up on an incredibly healthy diet: no sugar till I was 1,
    breastfed for over a year, organic homegrown vegetables, raw milk, no MSG,
    no additives, no aspartame. My mother used homeopathy, aromatherapy,
    osteopathy; we took daily supplements of vitamin C, echinacea, cod liver
    oil.

What a perversion of the word *healthy*! Only the breastfeeding (and arguably
the cod liver oil, if there were other dietary deficiencies) is in any way
related to health. Raw milk is even dangerous for your health (you might say
it's worth the small risk of disease because you get better tasting cheese, but
that's not what the word *healthy* means).

