Nonspecific Citations

The point of this post is to introduce the term *nonspecific citation*.

A common problem with antibody is non-specific binding: while the antibody may
be targetted to grab on to protein P, it actually also grabs X, Y, and Z, which
are somewhat similar to P.

A nonspecific citation is when paper gets cited as an example of a broad class
rather than for its specific ideas.

ยง

In the case of a review article, it might make some sense: if you are just
mentioning the field, you might as well cite `my review of bioimage informatics
<http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-642-13131-8_2>`__. Even here,
though, you could cite other reviews.

In the case of the research articles, though, it is often more of a *throwaway
citation*: we need to mention work in the area of cell image analysis and I
have a `fairly recent paper on this
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/07/10/new-paper-determining-the-subcellular-location-of-new-proteins-from-microscope-images-using-local-features/>`__,
so you cite that. Or you cite somebody else's work as it does not really matter
the specific contents of that citation.

ยง

There are intermediate levels of specificity. Maybe you are writing a paper
that somehow touts the general usefulness of local features and you write a
sentence such as:

    Local features are useful (or SURF has been used) in many context such as A
    [paper], B [paper], and cell image analysis [my work].

Then there is the completely nonspecific:

    Recent work in bioimage informatics [..., my work, ...] ...

ยง

This will of course lead to a citation Matthew Effect: if you are highly cited,
you are likely to get even more citations.

ยง

Whenever I have a paper I really want to read that is not open-access and to
which my institution does not have access, I generally get it by asking the
author for a preprint. It has never been a problem and has even led to some
good follow up discussions.

On the other hand, if I am not looking for a specific paper but just something
in a general area to get acquainted, then it whether something it open access
or not may make me choose to read (and then subsequently cite) one paper
instead of the other. In fact, just seeing an IEEE link will be enough for me
to not even click through to the abstract.

