1. `All your base are biased
   <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0014482714000160>`__. A
   review of the many ways in which DNA-seq & RNA-seq library preparation methods are biased

2. `Current Practice in Software Development for Computational Neuroscience and
   How to Improve It
   <http://www.ploscompbiol.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pcbi.1003376>`__

My first thought was that it is silly that we have these *Current Practice in
Software Development in [Subfield of Field]* papers when the issues are not
that different between fields. However, this paper does have a few quite
interesting thoughts which are as applicable to Computational Biology as to
Computational Neuroscience.

3. `Is post publication criticism of work cyberbullying?
<http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/neuroskeptic/2014/01/04/reanalysis-science/>`__

Part of the problem is with with how broad people have been interpreting the
notion `of cyberbullying
<http://www.popehat.com/2012/03/29/in-which-i-dare-connecticut-to-come-get-me-come-at-me-bro/>`__:
 
     A person commits electronic harassment when such person, with intent to
     harass, annoy or alarm another person, transmits, posts, displays or
     disseminates, by or through an electronic communication device [...] which
     [...] (5) Has the effect of causing substantial embarrassment or
     humiliation to that person within an academic or professional community.

(See `popehat for a less measured take on this issue
<http://www.volokh.com/2012/03/30/connecticut-legislature/>`__. And, yes, this
bill did not become law [and, if it did, it would be have been struck down as
unconstitutional, but the point is that people seriously proposed it.)

4. I mentioned back in June that the `University of Lisbon was merging with the
Technical University of Lisbon
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/06/24/universities-merging-improved-rank/>`__
and how this should lead to higher rankings for the combined university.

Today, I read that, indeed, the combined university had reached number 2 in the
`SCImago Iberian rank <http://www.scimagoir.com/>`__. This is a ranking system
which does not seem to control for size of the institution (in the global
tables, MIT clocks in at 43, well below institutions such as the Veteran
Affairs Medical Centers at 17). Still, these results are already being
trumpeted as a `success
<http://www.publico.pt/sociedade/noticia/universidade-de-lisboa-em-2%C2%BA-lugar-no-ranking-iberoamericano-da-producao-cientifica-1622545>`__
[portuguese link], even though this implies nothing about improved quality of
the institution (in fact, the results are based on *data that predates the
university merger*).


