    First they mock you while you clean their house, then they write columns
    about how much better they are, then you take their job. -- The Robot
    Ghandi


0. I thought MOOCs were a gimmick when I first heard of them, but then I read
many anti-MOOC articles and now I think MOOCs are great.

No, that's not a typo. When I read my inchoate critical arguments about MOOCs
spelled out, I saw how weak they are. Now, I that the critics miss the point
and the boosters are correct.

1. I learned to cook from a MOOC. Not strictly true. (1) I could already cook
pretty well before [#]_ and (2) it was a MOOC, but an online course from
`rouxbe <http://rouxbe.com/>`__ which is not open: you pay for it [#]_.
However, I did learn a lot from the videos.

Interesting how much we spend on classes of a certain type: cooking classes,
yoga classes, spin classes, basket weaving classes, musical instrument classes,
but we see these as separate from serious learning [#]_. We could say that
serious learning is what people don't like doing, but it seems that MOOCs are
transforming *higher education into yoga classes*.

2. MOOCs are are cute and have value, but major weaknesses. Current MOOCs are
an amateur affair done by professors who are making it up as they go along.

However, too many are making the mistake of confusing weaknesses of the MOOC
model with weak potential for online education more general. Rouxbe, for
example, has professionally edited videos, with a professional voice actor. You
can see that each 5 minute segment took hours of work.

Add automated grading and student following by machine, and the resulting system
may be hard to beat by anything but a dedicated human tutor. [#]_ And feel free
to add a few low-earning TAs to the mix.

3. MOOCs (and online education more generally) may be calling the bluff on many
myths of education.

Bryan Caplan has been pointing out for years that, if you live in a big city,
you can probably just walk into any university course you want and the
instructor probably won't mind even if you're not a student. You don't have to
accept his conclusion that education is mostly about signalling to see that
MOOCs call the bluff on *lack of access* arguments.

Professors are getting their bluff called too. They risk getting demoted from
guardians of knowledge and designers of curricula to coaches or nags. `This
very interesting Atlantic piece (not about MOOCs)
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2014/01/how-to-escape-the-community-college-trap/355745/?google_editors_picks=true>`__
has the following quote *students don't do optional* (another way to phrase it
is *students do not study to learn*). Professors risk becoming the voice of the
machine: when the automated tutor notes that a student starts lagging, it sends
the human because humans can exert a different kind of psychological pressure
when the automated nags start to lose power. And if your job is to *be the
human*, then that's not really a very hard-to-find skill, is it? Or, to put it
another way, you can't really expect a very large salary. [#]_


The idea that education/certification needs to come with a gym membership and
neatly manicured campuses (the typical American college experience) is also
getting its bluff called. Many forms of student consumption get subsidized by
parents and state if they came bundled with a degree, but now it will be
increasingly easy to just get the education if online tuition is less than half
of what it costs to get the Deluxe package. This is especially true at 
`non-first tier colleges
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/education/2014/01/southern_new_hampshire_university_how_paul_leblanc_s_tiny_school_has_become.single.html>`__.

(There are a lot of people who are inclined to argue this point by stating *the
rise in tuition is explained by the rise in administration, not
professors/TAs*. This is, at best, a change of subject; at worst, it points out
how much harder traditional universities have to work to survive. Cutting on
administration will not be easy and many of these extra costs will fight back
[what, are you shutting down the gym in an obesity crisis? firing the the
campus diversity task force only shows how bigoted Big State U still is...] Big
organizations rarely slim down peacefully)

This ties in to the fourth point:

4. Over the next few decades, online education will probably make educational
results more meritocratic and more unequal (after a few decades, I don't know,
nor do you).

Having the ability to profit from these new opportunities will be increasingly
valuable. Call it `motivation
<http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/07/29/the-hard-part-is-motivation-books-etc/>`__,
conscientiousness, `bourgeois values
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bourgeois-Virtues-Ethics-Age-Commerce/dp/0226556646/ref=sr_1_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1390986717&sr=1-2&keywords=deirdre+mccloskey>`__,
its value is going up.
`Average is Over
<http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0525953736/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0525953736&linkCode=as2&tag=mutualinform-20>`__

.. [#] I am a pretty decent amateur cook. At one point, I considered going to
   culinary school.

.. [#] Open is the word-du-jour, but people throw it about to mean things like
   `free as in beer, free as in speech
   <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gratis_versus_libre>`__ or just the fact that
   you do not need to enroll in a university to attend an open course.

.. [#] I think basic cooking skills should be taught in high-school, but that
   is a topic for another day.

.. [#] The comeback about "inspiring teachers" just proves the point: this is a
   teacher-like-coach not teacher-as-knowledge-source. Couldn't a good actor
   "inspire" more?

.. [#] Expect however star power to grow. Well-known professors will be able to
   lend their name to projects and charge for that while the grunt work is done
   by anonymous TAs.

