I cannot find a decent offline email client

I spend a lot of time on trains and airplanes without internet connection and
keep struggling with the fact that it has become significantly harder to use
email without an internet connection. I would like to be able to write a few
emails, which would be sent out when I reached civilization and had enough
wireless coverage to tether the computer to my phone. Ten years ago, this would
have been easy; today, not so much.

(Of course, if there was decent wireless data coverage everywhere, this would
not be an issue [#]_, except perhaps for data charges, but as the world stands,
I can get neither a good data connection nor decent software to handle this.)

ยง

The first email clients were on networked machines are were online only, then
when dialup came along, they became desktop applications: your mail would be
stored on your machine and minimizing the amount of time spent online was often
a goal: you would write your messages, save in the Outbox, and then go online
to get new messages and send your stored messages. As things moved to the cloud
(especially with the appearance of Hotmail and the concept of webmail), desktop
email started losing users (it probably never had many customers) and is dieing
slowly.

I would happily pay for a decent desktop offline-capable email client, but
cannot find one. I tried Postbox, but it's just a reheated version of
thunderbird. Thunderbird itself is no longer being developed (as Mozilla is
focusing on other priorities [#]_). I used to use Kmail, which was not great,
but worked in KDE3; completely stopped working with the advent of KDE4. Opera
Mail is also no longer begin developed.

I could try to use mutt or another command line client, but the command line
has not adapted to rich displays [#]_ and HTML is a nuisance in those [#]_. I
also enjoy drag&dropping attachments.

ยง

It is interesting to see how even with software, functionality can be lost if
not continuously maintained.

.. [#] Perhaps part of the issue is that the US does have better wireless data
   than Germany. Since most technology is developed for that market, I am not
   really a customer.

.. [#] I also suspect the technology hit a local maximum and could not easily
   be improved and the many bugs encountered are very hard to fix.

.. [#] There is no technical reason to not have colour and HTML on the command
   line, but it's hard to move these very old technology and the track record
   is that they'll be with us for a few more decades.

.. [#] I still remember when it was considered rude by some to send HTML email.
   I too had a phase like that.

