Computers are personal

Here is a very typical fallacious thinking (so typical that hardly a day goes
by without me reading an example of it):

1. When I interact with a computer, the interaction is blockier than with a
person. There is little shared knowledge as computers know nothing of the real
world and I must be very precise and give my information to the computer in a
way it understands, which is very limited.

2. Therefore, systems that rely on computers are blockier than systems that use
humans. As we rely more and more on computers, our day to day lives will be
blockier as the systems know less of the real world than people do.

Number 1 is true. Number 2 is fallacious (fallacy of composition) and not-true
in large systems. *In a large system, computers make the interaction more and
not less personal* and *computer systems know more about the world than
people-based systems*.

Large systems of humans are typically called *bureaucracies* and are neither
personal, nor flexible, nor generally aware of anything but their internal
behaviours. They existed before computers and were already seen as dead and
soulless (Kafka wrote before computers after all and Chaplin's Modern Times
also predates computers). Blaming computers for the soullessness of
bureaucratic thinking is like blaming cars for the distance between two cities.

To pick a really basic example: consider managing a pre-computer online dating
provider (this is not so ridiculous: the mail order bride has a long
tradition). There is no way it will scale to hundreds of thousands of users
with good personalized recommendations. It will either remain a boutique
business or matches will be based on not more than a few basic markers (filter
by age, language spoken, income).

In a small group, we can learn each others situations and quirks, relationships
can deepen based on shared experience and interaction. In a large group,
*people do not have the mental capacity to maintain these relationships*, so we
(humans) reduce each other to simple forms, simple numbers and checkboxes. Then
we can manage. Computers are not so limited.

Consider that you need zip codes for the postal system (which was designed
*before computers*), but google maps rarely asks you for it: the name of the
street is more than enough. The numeric zip code was something designed to help
humans deal with large number of streets, computers don't need them [#]_.

In the film `Her <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Her_(film)>`__ (spoiler ahead),
the computerized personality with whom the main character falls in love
confesses that she maintains hundreds of these personal deep conversations
simultaneously. This is sci-fi, but amazon.com can maintain personalized
recommendations for millions of users simultaneously, an airline system can
remember the dietary requirements of every passenger in its system, &c

Now, naturally this personalization is not the same as a personal relationship
[#]_, but it is not possible to have a personal relationship with large
institutions (private or public) in the same way we have with friends or within
our small work group! It just isn't. With a large organization you will always
be a client or a user out of thousands or millions [#]_. With computers, that
relationship *becomes more personal* and certainly less blockier.

ยง

A final note. While computers do enable more personalized interactions, they
can also turbocharge the bureaucratic impulse towards putting people into
boxes. *I'm sorry, our computer system does not allow that* is the typical
expression of this (although this particular sentence is probably a lie at
least as often as it is true; comes from the same place as "I'd love to give
you a discount, but my boss said no").

.. [#] Naturallly, if there are two streets in the same city with the same zip
   code, you need to disambiguate. But a computer certainly does not need to
   have a zip code to help it route a letter.

.. [#] I can already see the rejoinder "Silicon Valley-wannabe-scientist
   confuses personalized with personal." Still, saying *home is where the
   internet is* is not devoid of a certain truth. I certainly feel a *coming
   home* feeling when I open my email and my favorite blogs. Do read `Ventak on
   this subject <http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2014/04/16/a-life-with-a-view/>`__

.. [#] This is part of the reason why some people like small organizations, but
   I don't really see a future made up of small institutions. Who is going to
   break up the United States into 1000 different polities? And I, for one, am
   not ready to give up the comforts of large scale capitalism for the
   opportunity of more conversations with strangers selling me things.

