    First they mock you while you clean their house, then they write columns
    about how much better they are, then you take their job. -- The Robot
    Ghandi


`<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/education/2014/01/southern_new_hampshire_university_how_paul_leblanc_s_tiny_school_has_become.single.html>`__

0. I thought MOOCs were a gimmick when I first heard of them, but then I read
many anti-MOOC articles and now I think MOOCs are great.

No, that's not a typo. When I read my inchoate critical arguments about MOOCs
spelled out, I saw how weak they are. Now, I that the critics miss the point
and the boosters are correct.

1. I learned to cook from a MOOC. Not a MOOC, but an online course. [#]_

Interesting how much we spend on "classes" of a certain type: yoga classes,
spin classes, basket weaving classes, musical instrument classes, but we see
these as separate from serious learning [#]_. We could say that serious
learning is what people don't like doing, but it seems that MOOCs are
transforming education into yoga classes.

2. MOOCs are are cute and have value, but major weaknesses. Current MOOCs are
an amateur affair done by professors who are making it up as they go along.

However, too many are making the mistake of confusing weaknesses of the MOOC
model with weak potential for online education. Rouxbe has professionally
edited videos, with a professional voice actor.

Adding automated grading and student following by machine, the resulting system
may be hard to beat by anything but a dedicated human tutor. [#]_

3. MOOCs (and online education more generally) may be calling the bluff on many
myths of education.

Bryan Caplan has been pointing out for years that, if you live in a big city,
you can probably just walk into any university course you want and the
instructor probably won't mind even if you're not a student. You don't have to
accept his conclusion that education is mostly about signalling to see that
MOOCs blow away any talk of *lack of access*.

Professors are getting their bluff called too. They risk getting demoted from
guardians of knowledge and designers of curricula to coaches or nags. This
very interesting Atlantic piece (not about MOOCs) has the following quote
*students don't do optional* (another way to phrase it is *students are not in
it to study*). Professors risk becoming the voice of the machine: when the
automated tutor notes that a student starts lagging, it sends the human because
humans can exert a different kind of psychological pressure when the automated
nags start to lose power.

The idea that education/certification needs to come with a gym membership and
neatly manicured campuses is also getting its bluff called. Many forms of
student consumption get subsidized by parents and state if they came bundled
with a degree, but now it will be increasingly easy to just get the education
if tuition is less than half of what it costs to get the Deluxe package.

(There are a lot of people who are inclined to argue this point by stating *the
rise in tuition is explained by the rise in administration, not
professors/TAs*. This is, at best, a change of subject; at worst, it points out
how much harder traditional universities have to work to survive. Cutting on
administration will not be easy and many of these extra costs will fight back
[what, are you shutting down the gym in an obesity crisis? firing the whole of
the campus diversity task force only shows how bigoted Big State U still
is...])

This ties in to the fourth point:

4. Over the next few decades, online education will probably make educational
results more meritocratic and more unequal (after a few decades, I don't know).
Call it motivation, conscientiousness, bourgeois values, its value is going up.
`Average is Over <>`__

.. [#] Curiously enough, I would not have paid the current price. When I first
   got the service, you could subscribe on a per-month basis. After a few
   months, they switched the system  to the current model and offered to have
   all money paid in converted to a discount.

.. [#] I think basic cooking skills should be taught in high-school, but that
   is a topic for another day.

.. [#] The comeback about "inspiring teachers" just proves the point: this is a
   teacher-like-coach not teacher-as-knowledge-source.

