A Note On Predatory Publishers

There are two types of predatory publishers:

1. The truly predatory. These are the guys who build a website with the same
name as a real journal, copy its editorial board and wait for scientists to
make a mistake. Or who have conferences with the same name and organizing
committee as a real conference (except for a hyphen or some other minor thing;
the committee is still fake, though).

These are publishers preying on trusting authors. This is, by far, the
**minority** of predatory publishers.

2. The low quality (or perhaps no quality) journals. This is what most of
Beall's list is actually about.

This is **the publishers and the authors*** preying on the scientific system
and often preying on taxpayer's money! The authors *are accomplices and not
victims of predatory publishers*.

The people who submit there generally know what they're getting. Or at least
they should know. [#]_ An author who submits some `mediocre poems as a research
article <http://www.rjelal.com/RJELAL-Vol.1.1%202013/DR%20Hilal%201100..pdf>`__
cannot be deluded (ht `Jeffrey Beall
<http://scholarlyoa.com/2013/07/05/ky-publications/>`__).

If you are at a third rate institution with third rate supervision and your
work is third rate, this is win-win-lose: you win because you get a publication
(which you can tout to your funders), the publisher wins because they get the
publishing fees. The taxpayer loses twice: once for paying the publishing fee
and even more if this outlet is an excuse for you to not do the kind of good
work that would get you in a real journal.

This is, naturally, a bigger problem at non-first world institutions [#]_. The
work is not as strong and the supervision is weaker, thus you can fool the
bureacracy by pointing to all of the shitty not-really-peer-reviewed papers you
published (or the bureacracy understands and helps you fool the politicians;
it's fools all the way up).

However, it can happen in the US as well. The story of `Western Illinois
University
<http://scholarlyoa.com/2012/10/31/exposing-sketchy-faculty-publications-the-dirty-western/>`__
seems to be similar: the professors knew they weren't really getting
peer-reviewed, the union knew, the departments knew... Everyone still went
through the motions to be able to claim that *our faculty publishes needs
two-peer peer-reviewed journal publications for tenure* [#]_. The fact that it
was a private institution does not change the basic point that it is the
taxpayer paying. Its college students get taxpayer subsidized loans and they
may get some public research money as well (which go to pay for these
publishing fees). They are not victims, they are predators. The taxpayer is the
victim.

.. [#] There is always the possibility of publishing in a barely-known journal
   that's starting out because you think it shows promise and later realizing
   that it is actually a bad journal with little peer review. You can minimize
   the risk for it by looking at who is the editor, &c; but sometimes you might
   really make a mistake. This is not what we are discussing here, though. I
   have also heard people argue that 10-15 years ago, some people really were
   fooled by low-quality conference invitations which then required some
   payment as they were too trusting.

.. [#] I might get some pushback on this, but seriously: a country that had
   strong institutions and, on average, good work would be a first world
   country. That's what being first world means! (Yes, there are exceptions;
   but there are more problems in non-first world countries).

.. [#] Read the second comment by Robert J. Hironimus-Wendt on `this page
   <http://scholarlyoa.com/2012/10/31/exposing-sketchy-faculty-publications-the-dirty-western/>`__
   Even as he tries to defend the school, what becomes obvious is that the
   standards are shoddy.

