I was in Cyprus last week for a `software carpentry workshop
<http://www.linksceem.eu/ls2/news-and-activities/events/events/event/32-4th-linksceem-general-user-meeting-june-2014.html>`__

The country feels poorer than their GDP per capita would indicate. To a large
extent, this is because the GPDpc is current income, but what we feel is the
wealth (in the houses, the cars, the city infrastructure), which requires
several years of income to accumulate.

In fact, in Nicosia, this process was visible. Houses seemed be either
dilapidated or freshly renewed. Even with the crisis, it'll look very different
in 10 years. It'll feel more like Lisbon feels nowadays [#]_.

ยง

Some people who live in a different country from where their grandparents lived
sometimes feel a need to go "search for their roots". To some extent this is a
self-fulfilling fiction, which comes from the same romantic ideas that there is
some special in place or blood: even if there isn't anything there, the fact
that we think there is, makes us behave in a certain way and becomes true [#]_.

However, there is something beyond the romantic mistake, namely that
understanding the environment in which your family grew up can give you
understanding why they behave in certain ways. Knowing where they are coming
from [#]_ can give you insight about why they behave like they do.

I live in between Southern Germany and Luxembourg. In the 1800s, many left this
area to go look for a better life in America. However, nowadays, it'd be
difficult to understand why. Luxembourg is the richest state in the EU, and one
of the places that feels more American to me [#]_. It is not the poor,
subsistence-farming, harsh winters place your ancestors fled. In fact, visiting
Luxembourg is not visiting the place your ancestors left, it is visiting a
completely different place that is at the same location [#]_.

Knowing the past is naturally important to understanding the present. The
nouveau rich attitudes of the Luxembourgians [#]_ or the `Swabian housewife
myth
<http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21595503-views-economics-euro-and-much-else-draw-cultural-archetype-hail-swabian>`__
(which so upsets Southern Europe) both stem from a half remembered poverty. But
we do not directly visit this past in Luxembourg, the city with the highest
number of Michelin stars per capita.

ยง

To travel in space is to travel in time. When I visit Nicosia or `Beira
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beira,_Mozambique>`__, I am visiting the recent
past of Portugal. When walking these countries, vague childhood memories come
back, I see a society which was already disappearing when I was growing up in
Portugal.



.. [#] Portugal itself has not had much economic growth since 2001, but from
   2001 to 2010, we could see large changes in the look & feel of many cities.

.. [#] This was mocked in one of the better episodes of *Curb Your Enthusiasm*
   where Larry David, whose portrait of stereotypical neurotic Jewishness is a
   major aspect of the show, "discovers" he was actually a Christian adopted at
   birth.  Therefore, he changes his whole personality to be the Larry David
   stereotype of the Christian. During the episode, he figures out it was all a
   mistake and thus goes back to being himself. 

.. [#] It's not a coincidence that "I know where you are coming from" is a
   metaphorical expression for "I understand you".

.. [#] I often say that "Luxembourg is what the Americans think they are, but
   are not." It's a cosmopolitan society with a free-market low-tax economy
   and, generally, a culture of being direct and straight-forward when
   interacting with others (while being pleasant and polite). America is more
   of these things than, say France, but less of these things than Luxembourg.

.. [#] The past is a different place, they do things differently there.

.. [#] My favorite Luxembourgian image is little booths selling grilled sausage
   on bread, served with expensive Champagne in plastic flutes.

