The Schelling Globalization

Why is soccer the world's most important sport? I could write that it is 
the inherent unfairness of the sport which makes it so appealing (yes, the
unfairness is what is appealing; the fact that a team playing visibly worse
football can get a lucky break and score a late goal to beat the stronger team
is what makes soccer the emotional roller coaster that it can be [#]_.

However, to a large extent, we like soccer as individuals because others like
soccer. Viewing the games of the World Cup is a great common activity which
sweeps up even those who don't usually watch sports (except for a few
philistines). Collectively, we watch the World Cup because we watch the World
Cup.

Or, to use a fancy technical term: The World Cup is the global `Schelling Point
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Focal_point_(game_theory)>`__ of sports
enjoyment.

ยง

In the past (or perhaps in the bizarre atypical world of 1950-2000), the
dominance of soccer was not as great as individual countries often converged on
a sport that few others cared about that much (China can dominate ping-pong
without upsetting too many people; which other countries even have ping-pong
fans? [#]_). In the extreme case, a country could just make up its own sport
and proudly dominate while others looked on amused or puzzled (e.g., American
football).

ยง

Now, we seem to have converged to a single Schelling point. Yes, the US is a
laggard, but even there, `25 million people
<http://time.com/2917615/world-cup-2014-soccer-ratings/>`__ watched the
national team draw with Portugal (which does not even have 25 million people)
[#]_.

.. [#] This is tightly linked to the fact that the sport is a low scoring one.
   Attempts to make it higher score risk ruining this by making the better team
   win even more often.

.. [#] Portugal together with Spain completely dominated `quad hockey
   <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roller_hockey_(quad)>`__ for generations. As I
   was growing up, it was still present in the general consciousceness, but has
   now become a minor sport.

.. [#] I've long said the US are an underrated team. They consistently "beat
   expectations," which means the general expectations are too low. I expect
   them to win a World Cup in the next few decades.

