In the last 12 months, I had 6 papers published [#]_ (two as first author, four
as middle author). I currently have another 3 in review plus another two close
to submission (two more submission before the end of the year are likely).

Awesome productivity, right? It wouldn't be bad for a small lab to get a paper
every two months and I'm just a guy with a laptop.

§

Unfortunately, these numbers reflect not just the fact that I'm both
extraordinarily productive and work long hours [#]_, but also the fact that for
the previous two years I didn't have anything come out.

During those days, all of my work got stuck in different stages of the pipeline
without seeing the light of print. I did do other things, like move between
countries (twice), I did have other things happen (like writing a PhD thesis
and what not), but no papers published.

I did submit manuscripts. They got rejected after (sometimes long) reviews.
Sometimes, they got rejected twice for good measure.

§

This post will surely get some google hits from people who think it's about how
to deal with not having sex for a long time. It is not. But if it were, it
wouldn't be that much different.

When you keep submitting manuscripts and they keep getting rejected, you start
to lose confidence, you lose your edge, you doubt yourself. This applies not
only to the submission process per se (submitting the manuscript, where you
start to procrastinate with more-or-less finished work) but to the everyday
practice of science, you start to lose the scientific killer instinct.

Much of what I do (we do, as scientists) is try to swim in the ocean of
analysis possibilities and false hypotheses to find a current which I can
pursue to a pot of gold. It's not a needle in a haystack. Needles may be
difficult to find, but when you do find them, you are sure you have a needle.
If you are (un)lucky, you just sit on the haystack and the needle will announce
itself on your behind. Good scientific hypotheses are not like that. They hint
at you, look very much like bad hypotheses, and are hard to distinguish from
the morass.

I feel rather that I swim around trying to detect hints of a current. The
currents are there, but so are waves and fish and other divers trying to
confuse you. The trick is to feel the vague hints of a current and then
systematically show that it is there. Most of the time, though, your hypothesis
of a current turns out to just be a whale fart [#]_.  However, you need to have
enough of a killer instinct to pursue these whale farts one after another until
you find the right stream. When you lose confidence, you risk swimming around
aimlessly, dismissing even true currents as whale farts.

§

Eventually, though, the coin tosses of peer review started going my way [#]_.

In the meanwhile, this experience made reconceptualize a large part of the
process. For example, I now no longer see submission as a goal, but as an
intermediate milestone. At CMU, there is an annual event, called the `Random
Distance Run <http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~RDR/>`__ where the length of the race is
decided randomly partway through the race.

    The exact number of laps will be specified by the sum of two ENORMOUS FUZZY
    DICE rolls – one occurring just before the start of the race, and one just
    before the first runner finishes the number of laps specified by the first
    dice roll.

Getting a publication is the same, when you submit, you are at the point where
a new die is cast. You may be near the end of the race or you may not.

§

At one point, I commented with someone that all my stuff seemed to fail in
review. They said something to the effect of *it must be hard to keep failing*
and I just said *when you're in science, failing is the job*.

Failing is the job.

    Fail. Fail again. Fail better.

    — Samuel Beckett 



.. [#] `One
   <https://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/07/31/mahotas-software-paper-published/>`__,
   `two
   <http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/07/10/new-paper-determining-the-subcellular-location-of-new-proteins-from-microscope-images-using-local-features/>`__,
   `three
   <http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2013/10/21/new-paper-metagenomic-species-profiling-using-universal-phylogenetic-marker-genes-nature-methods-nature-publishing-group/>`__,
   `four
   <http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2014/01/16/host-cell-sensors-for-plasmodium-activate-innate-immunity-against-liver-stage-infection/>`__,
   `five
   <http://metarabbit.wordpress.com/2014/02/03/new-paper-metagenomic-insights-into-the-human-gut-resistome-and-the-forces-that-shape-it/>`__,
   and `six <http://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.12677>`__ (post forthcoming).

.. [#] Even though both of these are true.

.. [#] I'm pretty sure that whales fart. Whales probably have an awesome
   microbiome.

.. [#] Yeah, yeah, peer review is not only random.


